                                            -*-text-*-

Guidelines for contributions to the Guile Recipes manual
--------------------------------------------------------

1. Licensing

Contributions must be licensed under the GNU Free Documentation
License (GFDL) or the GNU General Public License (GPL).

2. Copyright

Contributors are encouraged, but not required, to assign the copyright
for their contribution to the FSF.  `not required' also covers the
case where a contributor has every intention of assigning copyright,
but the process is simply taking a little time.  Note that:

- If you assign your copyright, other people (who have also assigned
  copyright) can make non-trivial enhancements to your contribution
  without any difficulties arising.  If you don't assign copyright for
  contribution, it complicates the ownership picture if other people
  make non-trivial changes to it; and if the burden of tracking
  copyright ownership becomes too great, it will be easier simply to
  remove that contribution from the manual.

- If it transpires that non-assigned copyrights turn out to be a bad
  thing (for whatever reason), the maintainers reserve the right to
  remove non-assigned contributions from the manual.

3. Manual organization

Each contribution has its own chapter and lives in its own Texinfo
file.  Chapters in related areas may be grouped together, but maybe
not.  Instead, the introduction to the manual will contain references
to chapters, and the introductory text will group those references
appropriately.

4. Copyright ownership

Given this organization, ownership for copyright purposes is
straightforward.  Each Texinfo file is either owned by its
contributor, or assigned to the FSF.

Every contribution's chapter should begin with a statement of who
contributed it, who owns the copyright, and its license (GFDL or
GPL).  These statements should appear in the printed and online
documentation -- i.e. they are _not_ comments.

5. Documentation vs. code

Contributed material should be informative and helpful, and should fit
in with the manual syntax.  In general, this means that a
straightforward lump of code is _not_ good enough -- it also needs the
statements mentioned above, introduction, explanation or
documentation, Texinfo markup, etc.

Note that the maintainers may be able to accept a contribution that
requires substantial extra work if copyright for that contribution has
been assigned to the FSF.  Where copyright has not been assigned, the
contribution has to be already finished by its author.

6. Good indexing

In practice, the manual index will be a very important tool for
someone looking for an example that is useful to them.  So please give
some thought to good indexing in your contribution.

7. Submissions

To submit material for inclusion in Guile Recipes, please send your
contribution to the guile-sources mailing list
<guile-sources@gnu.org>.

As far as past material is concerned, I do have an archive of material
that I will ask people about including individually, but it would make
things easier for me if people resubmitted past material to
guile-sources anyway.

--
Neil Jerram <neil@ossau.uklinux.net> April 20th 2001
